Abstract:
With the evolution and emergence of novel bacterial and viral pathogens, the identification and classification of the threats they may pose is the first step toward understanding associated impacts on environmental and public health. Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTP) play a major role in disseminating antimicrobial resistance (AMR), further circulating their infectivity range. To identify targeted microorganisms and functional genes, traditional wastewater-based epidemiology approaches rely on membrane filtration concentration and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)--based molecular methods. Nanotrap-based concentration methods paired with next-generation sequencing (NGS) for metagenomic analysis can provide higher species resolution with the ability to detect AMR presence and abundance. While the identification of AMR- associated genes is important, the integrative “One Health” approach recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) elucidates the risk severity of AMR-associated genes with the interconnections of human, animal, and plant health and their shared environments. Therefore, it is crucial to construct a waste-based epidemiology (WBE) workflow that integrates the nanotrap method with the implementation of the One Health- AMR risk framework. Although monitoring pathogenic shedding in wastewater influent may provide insight into a population’s infectious rates, there is fragmented knowledge concerning the effects of wastewater treatment on pathogens and AMR dissemination in our environments, particularly as treated wastewater (effluent) is discharged into the ocean.

To address these gaps, I propose to 1) develop and implement a workflow integrating nanotrap technology to establish dominant pathogenic taxa in wastewater influent and effluent from a WWTP, 2) use the AMR One-health framework to characterize AMR variability, and 3)  determine significant differences among pathogenic taxa and AMR genes within them. This study will elucidate the presence of pathogenic shedding and AMR dissemination in wastewater influent while illuminating wastewater treatment efficiency by comparing wastewater taxa and AMR frequencies to effluent. I expect to develop a WBE workflow to monitor clinically relevant AMR-associated genes in municipal wastewater.

